Praised be Jesus and Mary,
I warmly greet you all.
I am glad you came this evening
to the Basilica of St. Anthony.
To these spiritually-humorous
evenings, and before I start with
the catechesis, I will tell you later
what the title is, but maybe you saw
on social media, in the Sacristy we
have a box where we put lost items.
So, we've accumulated a lot of
things that people, as we like
to say, have scattered or lost.
There are some items that I believe
some of you might have lost,
maybe since last Thursday, so
let's see if anyone comes forward.
To start, let's see
what we pull out first.
Someone has lost their keys.
Has anyone lost their keys?
Have you checked your pockets,
does everyone have their house
keys so you can return home?
If no one has lost their keys, maybe
you've lost what the keys represent.
Maybe you've lost security.
You know, to lock yourself
somewhere where no one can reach
you, where you'll feel safe.
Where no one can attack you, no
one can take something from you.
But you might have also lost
many opportunities in your life.
Or you squandered them.
So now they are lost.
Because each of these keys represents a
new door you could have walked through.
Maybe you lost that if you
haven't already lost these keys.
Someone also left a planner,
unfortunately, it doesn't
have a name inside, but
the planner is filled out
so you don't think it's not.
So, someone lost a planner.
Has any of you ever lost a planner?
You see, maybe you've lost
what this planner represents.
This planner represents meaning,
it represents life, the most
vital meaning that you might
have lost and no longer have.
Somewhere you misplaced
it, somewhere it got lost.
Maybe some of you have lost
a cross, because what the
cross represents is our faith.
We can't say that we always
have enough faith in our lives.
Maybe some of you have stopped believing,
maybe someone came here for the first
time this Thursday to see what it's all
about, and maybe their faith will awaken,
maybe you've lost that faith in your life.
Someone lost their headphones.
Obviously, when they came here to
the basilica, they heard God, so
they no longer needed the headphones.
Or maybe one of you has lost
what the headphones represent.
Maybe you've lost your hearing
and can no longer hear God.
Maybe you've lost communication
with Him and no longer understand
what He's saying to you.
Someone lost their ID card too.
Filip Pintarić.
Let's give a round of
applause for our Filip.
Thank you.
You are beautiful.
He didn't lose his ID, I took it from him.
Because this ID represents our identity.
Who am I?
And maybe some of you have
just lost your identity.
Your identity, the fact that you
are a human being, a child of God,
a beloved child of God, a believer,
a Christian, any kind of identity.
All these lost things, somehow
when I talk about what is lost,
always point us to someone.
And that someone, considering we are
now in his basilica, is Saint Anthony.
I believe that many times in your
life you have heard, if you haven't
already experienced it yourself.
If you lose something, they say, pray
to Saint Anthony and you will find it.
This usually gets resolved very
quickly when we pray to Saint Anthony.
And then we say, when we find
something we thought was lost
forever, we call it a miracle.
And today's topic that I will
talk to you about is precisely
Saint Anthony and miracles.
Imagine this now, as Stjepan first
told the participants, close your eyes.
Get comfortable, you don't have to,
but imagine this: tomorrow morning
when you wake up, you open your eyes
and then suddenly it hits you, that
thing you've been praying for a long
time, something you've been searching
for, something that was a deep desire
of your heart, it has come true.
What we thought was impossible to
achieve in our lives has just happened.
You don't know how, you don't
know why, but you know it's real.
Maybe it's reconciliation with
someone, coming out of darkness,
maybe physical healing, maybe a
sense of peace you couldn't find.
Maybe it's just the answer to that
question you couldn't find an answer to.
But literally for any of these things to
happen, you can say a miracle occurred.
And now, I ask each of you
individually, what would be
a real miracle for you today?
And perhaps an even more important
question than what would be a real
miracle for you is, would you be
able to recognize that miracle?
Would you be able to recognize
the miracle that happened?
Maybe when you move in with someone,
can you recognize that as a miracle?
Passing an exam you were sure you
would fail when you face the professor.
When that anxiety you hide so
skillfully and deftly disappears,
and you finally feel loved.
Do you recognize, dear young people,
not just the young ones here but all
of you, do you recognize the moments in
your life that are actually miracles?
Miracles happen, I stand here today
before you and I have been given the
task to tell you, yes you who are here
today, that God still performs miracles,
we just often don't recognize them.
Miracle, miracle, miracle.
Miracle, miraculous, you have to
think, as one song in a musical says.
When we say the word miracle, we
often think of something grand and
extraordinary, something like from a
movie, from Hollywood, or maybe more
from Bollywood—they have bigger miracles
there, like the sea parting, the blind
seeing, or someone starting to fly.
But all of that, we can say, is
something extraordinary, something we
can't physically comprehend happening
before us, so we can call it a miracle.
But we also need to be aware
that a miracle is not a trick
and a miracle is not a circus.
Because we've all seen magicians and
their tricks, and we see something
flying if we don't know how it's
flying, or something disappearing
if we don't know how it disappeared.
But those are tricks, that's a
circus, that's entertainment,
that's not a real miracle.
So, what is a miracle then?
A miracle is when God breaks the silence.
When heaven intervenes in our reality.
A miracle is, I repeat once more, the
moment when God touches our reality and
through that says to us, "I am here,
do you see me?" And that is a miracle.
The Church defines a miracle as an
event that transcends the natural
laws, all those laws that we know.
And that miracle, that phenomenon,
cannot be explained by any examinations,
whether by medicine, science, or logic.
It means something that we cannot explain
by any means, something extraordinary,
without clear foundations that we
can document—that is truly a miracle.
And when the church declares
miracles, it does not do so lightly.
Something happened
there, that's a miracle.
The Church will never say that lightly.
Every miraculous occurrence is
thoroughly investigated by the
Church, especially because for someone
to be declared a saint, certain
miracles must occur beforehand.
These extraordinary acts, attributed
to the intercession of that person,
are necessary for their canonization.
And every miracle, every phenomenon
undergoes very serious and strict
examinations, both from a scientific
and a spiritual perspective.
These are the miracles we can
physically see, and they represent
only a small number of miracles.
I would dare to say maybe 0.1%.
Maybe even less.
But what about the other miracles?
You see, the other miracles are those
that will never come to public attention.
For which we will never
know that they happened.
These are the so-called inner miracles.
It's the change of heart
that happens within a person.
It's the peace that suddenly envelops
you, which you had no way of obtaining.
It's the forgiveness you couldn't muster
your whole life, and suddenly you gave it.
Everything that happens within a
person that we can't explain by
anything else, that is also a miracle.
And what I would like everyone to
remember is that a miracle is not proof.
We might say, well, a miracle happened,
so that's proof that God exists.
But that's not the purpose of a miracle.
A miracle is not proof that
God exists, that God is here,
but rather a miracle is a call.
A call to me, a call to you, to come
back to the Lord and recognize Him again.
This is how God speaks to us, saying,
"I am here, I am not far from you,
believe." As we talk about miracles,
under the theme of Saint Anthony of
Miracles, it would be remiss not to
say something about Saint Anthony.
I don't have much time, so
I'll try to keep it brief.
So, Saint Anthony, you've heard
of Saint Anthony, you regularly
come here to our Basilica, you've
heard of him outside as well.
He is actually a man whom people around
the world have decided to pray to and
invoke for help when they lose keys,
documents, but also when they lose
their identity, strength, or hope.
Saint Anthony was born in Portugal.
He was a Franciscan and
a very fervent preacher.
But what is most important for us here
today and for this topic is that he
left behind so much light that people
began to call him the Saint of Miracles.
In other words, Saint
Anthony the Miracle Worker.
As if he were the one performing miracles.
But despite the fact that Saint
Anthony performed miracles during
his lifetime, people didn't come
to him just because of that.
They didn't say, "Oh, he performed
a miracle, let's go listen to him
now." No, people came to him because
they felt God's presence through him.
Because he exuded, he testified
and embodied God through his life.
And yes, as he was like
that, miracles happened.
But not because Saint Anthony
was some kind of superhero with
superpowers or supernatural talents,
but because miracles happened
through him since he was open to God.
I won't list all the miracles, but
a few that happened during Saint
Anthony's life, where he was the one...
The first example where he was
the subject through whom a miracle
occurred is when people didn't
want to listen to Saint Anthony.
Saint Anthony stood at the edge of
the sea and began preaching to the
fish, and the miracle that happened
was that the fish gathered, and you
could see them listening to what Saint
Anthony was preaching, proclaiming,
when people didn't want to do so.
The second miracle occurred when
a mule knelt before the living
Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament.
A man did not want to believe, and to
prove it, he said that if this mule
chose the Host, Jesus, over food, then
he would believe, because he did not
believe that Jesus was present there.
The man starved his mule, and after a
few days, when they came to St. Anthony,
and St. Anthony raised the Blessed
Sacrament, food was placed to the side.
The mule was hungry, and the first
thing it did was kneel and bow before
Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament.
And just a little digression.
Often, as we stand up there during the
consecration, when we see that people
do not kneel when the transformation
happens, when we lift up "this is my
body, this is my blood," I wonder,
even that mule was less stubborn and
had more faith than we sometimes do.
So, can't I at least get down on my
knees for that minute and a half?
Then Saint Anthony, wanting to
introduce some new laws and change
the existing ones because they were
exploiting the people too much,
was invited to a meal by a nobleman
who poisoned the food he was given.
Saint Anthony prayed over the food and
ate it, and nothing happened to him.
Even though the food was
poisoned and he should have died.
And then that nobleman converted.
Saint Anthony was in two places at once.
There is an event where Saint
Anthony was preaching in a town.
A great storm came, and the entire
town ended up underwater except for the
square where Saint Anthony was preaching.
We can say that in that circle,
that square, not a single
drop of rain or water fell.
He also brought a dead child back
to life, reattached a severed
leg to a young man—literally,
the leg was three meters away.
He took the leg and, like connecting Lego
pieces, reattached it to the young man.
This was considered a miracle at
the time when Saint Anthony lived.
Even today, such a reattachment is
not possible as Saint Anthony did it.
He also resurrected a dead man who
had been murdered, and Saint Anthony's
father was accused of the murder.
Saint Anthony went to the grave where
the man was buried and told the dead
man to rise and say who had killed him.
The dead man rose from the grave,
named his killer, and returned back.
Maybe it sounds funny, maybe like
something out of a movie, but that's
how it happened and that's how
it's recorded, and we believe it.
And that's a miracle.
Because we can't prove a miracle,
we can only believe in it.
But listening to all this, Saint Anthony
was not a magician, someone who would
just perform a trick; rather, Saint
Anthony was always a guide towards Jesus.
And Saint Anthony never said, after
any miracle, look at me, I did this.
Instead, he always said, look
at Jesus, don't look at me.
And that was actually the miraculous
power that Saint Anthony had.
He showed God, not himself.
And that was during the time
of Saint Anthony, centuries
ago, but what about us today?
What about in our present time?
We often hear and often repeat
the phrase, there are no more
miracles like there used to be.
So why aren't there any?
And that might be true.
But again, maybe it's not about
the miracles, but about our eyes.
Because God has never stopped working,
not at any point in history, nor now.
Maybe we've just forgotten how to see.
Because today, we always look for
some sensation, something spectacular.
But God often gives us presence.
We look for some sign.
"God, give me a sign for this, God,
give me a sign for that, so I know
where I'll be tomorrow, where I'll be
the day after, what I'll eat, what I'll
drink. Will I wake up, give me some
sign." But God often doesn't give us
signs; instead, He gives us a person.
First, Himself in the person of Jesus
Christ, then others who are entrusted
to us, who will then tell us something,
convey a message, and through that, we
will recognize what God is giving us.
So it doesn't have to be a sign
that it's a miracle, but rather the
person God has placed in your life.
Similarly, I often look for that click,
for something to happen in an instant,
and that's it, that's the miracle.
But God often doesn't
give us such miracles.
Instead, God often calls us on a journey.
Then, on that journey, over a certain
period of time—maybe throughout our whole
life, maybe a week, maybe a day—He allows
us to reach the miracle we are seeking.
But to stay on the path with Him.
Because a miracle can be forgiveness that
you never thought you would give, and
sometimes that forgiveness takes time.
A sense of peace amidst the
chaos of life in which I live.
Maybe spiritual strength when
I'm completely down and don't
think I'll ever get up again.
I believe that each of you, at
least once in your life, has
experienced a miracle, but perhaps
you didn't recognize it because it
didn't look like a "movie miracle."
But when we talk about miracles like
this, the question always arises:
today, here, now, do I need a miracle?
Do I need a miracle in my life?
What miracle do you need?
What is inside you and in your
heart that you wish would change,
something you can't do on your own?
In you or in someone else?
Not something that would be
"nice to have." Not that.
But something without which you
feel like you're falling apart,
without which you can't go on,
without which you're breaking down.
What is that miracle that
you need in your life today?
Maybe you want to stop feeling
invisible because no one notices you.
Maybe you want to stop pretending
that everything is okay in your
life when you know it's not.
Maybe you want to feel
loved, accepted, free.
You see, when we recognize
these things and pray for them,
that's a prayer for a miracle.
But there's just one problem.
And the problem is in the box.
Nothing without this box today.
I need a volunteer.
I mean, I need two hands, one
to hold the microphone, so...
It's not complicated at all, just
stand there, look nice, and hold this.
See this jar?
You can lift it a bit so
those in the back can see.
This jar represents us, our shell.
Each of us, at our baptism,
truly becomes a Child of God.
At our baptism, we received the Holy
Spirit, God settled within us, and this
candle that will be lit represents that.
You can just lower it, you don't have
to lower yourself, just your hands.
And this candle now speaks within us,
it burns and speaks, but it also speaks.
This candle shines just
as God shines within us.
So where does the problem
with miracles occur?
You see, this candle burns
because the jar is open.
What happens in our lives is that we
often close ourselves off, just as we are.
I love you, hold it a bit tighter.
Thank you.
Alright, we need to open it later.
Thank you, you can sit down.
You see, this candle, even though
it's closed, no longer burns.
It burned a little.
It burned as long as
there was oxygen in it.
Because oxygen is needed
for the flame to survive.
And this happens within us.
We close ourselves off and then
expect that the little bit left in
us, the bit of God that remains, once
it burns out, there's nothing left.
We expect miracles to continue
happening in our lives.
And we pray for miracles
to happen in others' lives.
But how can they happen when
the connection is broken?
You see, you see
You see, this candle that represents
God in our lives, as I said,
it can only burn if the glass
is open, just like we are open.
And it will burn, it won't burn anymore.
I'm not lucky.
But maybe a miracle will happen.
It will burn as long as we
don't cast God out of our lives.
And that's important to know.
And that's what God does.
Maybe God, when we are open to Him,
won't give us the miracle we ask for,
"My God, do it exactly this way."
Instead, God will give us what we
need, not just what we often want.
Because we must be aware that God is
not a machine where we insert a token
and get exactly what we dialed in.
No, God is our Father who
is always there with us.
And finally, to wrap things up,
I've gone a bit overboard—it'll be a
miracle if Stjepan doesn't strangle
me, but they say miracles do happen.
But here's perhaps one more
question for the end that might
not have crossed your mind.
The question is this, a rhetorical
statement if I may say so.
Maybe you're not here
to receive a miracle.
Maybe you're here to be a miracle,
because Saint Anthony was just
a man like we are just people.
But you too can be, just like Saint
Anthony was, an answer to a prayer.
Your smile, your listening, your
message, and your presence, maybe that's
actually a miracle for someone who
will find a way out of the darkness.
Because you don't have to be that
saint on the icon in the picture.
No.
You need to be the one who dares to
say, "God, here I am, use me." And maybe
the miracle you need is the miracle
you will become for someone else.
So, I'll finish with this.
Thank you very much for your attention.